# Dissertation
A Comparison of Algorithms in Solving Large Instances of the 0-1 Knapsack Problem

The knapsack problem is a combinatorial optimisation problem with the goal of maximising the value of items included in a knapsack without exceeding the capacity. The 0-1 knapsack problem is a variation of this problem and an active area of research. Analysis of current research shows that several well-known algorithms in solving the problem have not been investigated in solving large instances of the problem. This study aims to investigate this matter, determining the performance of each algorithm in comparison to each other and whether each is suitable for solving large instances of the problem. Building on existing studies, it asks: Which of the algorithms performs best in solving large instances of the 0-1 knapsack problem? In the context of this study, the performance is determined by the solution, the time and memory usage, and the efficiency in finding good solutions.

Each of the four algorithms was optimised and tested on large problem instances with up to 100,000 items and a range of capacities. Analysis of the results reveals that both the branch and bound and genetic algorithms are inefficient at solving large instances of the problem. The dynamic programming algorithm is shown to find the best solutions for small-medium sized problems, however, suffers from very high memory usage in some large problems. The greedy algorithm proves to be the best algorithm for solving large problems with both low time and memory usage and either optimal or near-optimal results consistently, making this the preferred choice of algorithm for large problems.

